* Architecture

Secure Share intends to implement a scalable P2P social network enabling
real-time one-to-one, one-to-many and many-to-many message distribution for
applications using the network while fulfilling the privacy requirements
described in the previous chapter.

It provides private and group messaging, status updates and profiles in the
first prototype version, while keeping the protocol extensible allowing various
social applications to be built on top later.

By combining PSYC with a P2P network architecture we get an efficient and
extensible protocol provided by PSYC and security and privacy properties
provided by the underlying P2P network.

** P2P network architecture

Many P2P networks use an architecture where nodes connect to arbitrary peers, no
trust relation exists between them. A problem with this approach is that some
nodes could use more resources of the network than they contribute to it
(freeloaders), which can be alleviated by applying an economic model in the
network. For instance GNUnet uses an excess-based economy: a node when idle does
favors for free, but when busy it only works for nodes it likes and charges them
for favors they request, which they can pay back by doing a favor in return.

Another problem that could arise in this architecture are malicious nodes who
can perform various active attacks, including blocking access to parts of the
network, or returning false information to certain requests. These can be
avoided to some extent by randomized routing and by making it harder to create
new identities in the network.

A different approach we use is a friend-to-friend (F2F) architecture where nodes
only connect to friendly peers whom they trust. This has the advantage that it
avoids many attacks involving malicious nodes in the network. An attacker has to
infiltrate a user's social circle to perform a successful attack, which is much
harder. By adding a trust level metric to social connections we can further
differentiate between more and less trusted nodes in the network.

Also, a F2F architecture gives better incentives to participants in the network:
users help their friends by forwarding packets for them instead of random
strangers. Nodes with high bandwidth and no connection restrictions --
e.g. server machines in data centers -- can improve throughput and connectivity
in the network by serving their owner's social circle.

Other systems based on a F2F architecture include Freenet \cite{dark-freenet},
Drac \cite{drac}, Tonika, and GNUnet has a F2F mode as well.

** Structure of the network

Another aspect of P2P networks is whether they're structured or not. In
structured networks the structure of the network is predefined, the node ID
determines the position of the node in the network, this information is enough
to be able to route packets to their destination. Often a distributed hash table
(DHT) is used in structured P2P networks which provides hash table functionality
distributed over many nodes in the network.

A different approach is an unstructured network like the Internet, where
arbitrary nodes can connect, no structure is imposed upon the nodes. In this
case a routing table is needed to be able to route a packet to its destination.

A social network could be built purely using a DHT, LifeSocial \cite{lifesocial}
is an example of such a network. In this case every shared status message, image
or document would become an entry in the DHT, and a profile consists of a
collection of links to other DHT entries. To ensure only the intended recipients
have access to private data, DHT entries are encrypted with a symmetric key,
which is attached to the entry encrypted with every user's public key who should
have access to the entry. This means that there's no forward secrecy in this
network, if a user's private key is compromised all these entries can still be
decrypted with that key. Even if noticed in time, re-encrypting all entries
affected by a compromised key is quite a costly operation when the number of
entries become larger after using the system over the years.

For our case either an unstructured network is suitable, or a structured network
where the structure is only used for routing, and not for storing user data in a
DHT. In our architecture data is pushed once to recipients who store it locally
as long as they need it, which means all profile data, messages and received
files are all available locally -- even offline -- and can be viewed and
searched using local tools on the personal device.

** Software components

In a P2P network every user runs the P2P software on their devices, so it's
important that it is multi-platform, lightweight, and written in a compiled
language, so we can easily run it on all popular desktop platforms and small
devices as well, including plug computers, home routers, and even smartphones.

In our case the P2P software runs as a daemon -- a background process -- on the
local machine or on another device on the network. Client applications connect
to this daemon and integrate into the desktop or mobile GUI environment running
on the system.

Server machines, home routers and plug computers act as intermediary nodes in the
system, helping their owners' social network by forwarding packets for them.

Mobile phones require a different approach. Continuous network usage would drain
the battery quite fast, so we'll have to minimize it by disabling packet
forwarding for mobile nodes and connecting only to a trusted node with good
connectivity -- e.g. a server machine or a plug computer at home -- which would
forward the necessary packets for the mobile node.

** Peer-to-peer framework

We have examined various P2P systems looking for an implementation that can
serve as a basis for our social messaging platform. The criteria for a suitable
P2P framework was:

- Free/libre/open-source software.
- Multi-platform, lightweight and written in a compiled language.
- Implements and provides an API for essential P2P features such as
  bootstrapping, addressing, routing, encryption and NAT traversal.

We have found GNUnet to be the most promising implementation out there
satisfying these requirements. It is a modular P2P framework written in C,
providing an API for essential P2P functionalities. It supports advanced NAT
(Network Address Translation) traversal, which enables contacting nodes without
a public IP address typically found in home or corporate networks. Furthermore
it has several transport mechanisms with automatic transport selection,
including TCP, UDP, HTTP(S), SMTP and ad-hoc WiFi mesh networks. It also
provides various routing schemes and a distributed hash table.

It has three operation modes: in P2P mode it makes connections with any peer in
the network, in friend-to-friend (F2F) mode only trusted nodes are connected,
and in mixed mode a minimum number of trusted nodes are required to be connected
at all times.

GNUnet currently has two options for routing packets in the network: the
distance vector and the mesh service.

The distance vector (DV) service uses a fish-eye bounded distance vector
protocol \cite{gnunet-decrouting}, which builds a routing table by gossiping
about neighboring peers within a limited number of hops distance. It is a
link-state routing protocol with improved efficiency: nodes only know about the
state of a local neighborhood, and link state of nodes close to each other are
updated more often than of nodes multiple hops away. The DV service also
provides onion routing of packets through multiple hops, which improves network
connectivity by connecting two peers behind NAT through an intermediary hop, and
makes it harder for an observer to determine who is talking to whom.

The mesh service creates tunnels through several hops and supports multicast as
well. Initial routes to recipients are discovered using the DHT. It is still
being heavily worked on by the GNUnet team, for instance encryption is missing
and has to be implemented for the multicast groups in order to make it useful
for our purpose.

These routing methods only support delivery of packets to connected nodes, in
order to provide offline messaging, we'll need a store-and-forward mechanism in
the network. This can be implemented by storing encrypted packets on more stable
nodes in the network, until the recipient comes back online.

#+BEGIN_COMMENT
GNUnet's DHT component can be used for facilitating the bootstrapping process by
storing user public key to current node ID mappings in the DHT. This allows
peers offline for a longer period to look up the current node of a contact
in order to re-establish connection to the network, or it can be used to publish
addresses of nodes hosting public groups or providing a public news feed.
#+END_COMMENT

GNUnet also has an anonymous file sharing component which uses a DHT together
with the GNUnet Anonymity Protocol (GAP). For our use case -- transferring files
between friends -- this is not needed, instead we transfer files just like other
messages, using PSYC's multicast distribution channels. As the PSYC packet
syntax supports binary data without any encoding, this causes no additional
overhead. In order to transfer files, we would have to split them up into
smaller fragments, as the maximum packet size supported by GNUnet is 64KB.

#+CAPTION: Components and message flow in GNUnet
#+LABEL: fig:arch
#+ATTR_LaTeX: width=8.2cm placement=[h!]
[[./gnunet.png]]

** Messaging daemon

GNUnet's modular architecture allows us to extend it with a service that
implements a messaging protocol, manages the connections between people, and
provides a local client interface. This service -- called psycd -- uses the PSYC
protocol for communication with both other peers and local clients.

Psycd sends messages through GNUnet core, which encrypts the message and passes
it to the modular transport system, sending packets through one of its transport
plugins.

In our prototype we use direct connections to peers. Users manually add their
friends by exchanging hello messages, which contain their public key and current
addresses. For the prototype version the focus was on the implementation of the
messaging daemon, and we intend to work on the underlying routing mechanism in
future versions.

See figure \ref{fig:arch} for an illustration of the components used in the
system. Dotted parts are not existing yet, only planned. The arrows depict the
flow of messages between components.

** Functionality

One of the core concepts of PSYC is programmable channels with their own
subscription lists. Using this combined with custom user interfaces makes it
possible to implement the usual functionality found in centralized and federated
social networks, like private and group messages, status updates, photo and link
sharing, as well as features not found in those networks, like sharing of files
and custom content, or real-time notifications for custom events.

As Secure Share runs on the users' own device and stores all incoming messages
and data locally, this enables offline usage and local search in the data
received from subscribed friends or groups.
