* Requirements and Related Work

This chapter describes our requirements for a system that we can use to build a
secure social network and introduces currently available alternatives to
centralized social networks. This chapter is partly based on \cite{fsw-paranoia}.

** Privacy

Our goal is to provide a system for social interaction in a privacy-protecting
and scalable manner. A truly private communication system we're aiming for
should have the following properties:

- End-to-end encryption: only the intended recipients can read the messages, no
  server or network operators along the way between the communicating
  parties. To ensure this, it is not enough to use link-level encryption between
  a client and a server, end-to-end encryption is needed, which means that every
  participant in the system has to manage their own cryptographic keys on their
  own systems.
- Perfect forward secrecy: messages transmitted over the network can't be
  decrypted later if a user's private key is compromised. To achieve this,
  temporary session keys need to be used when encrypting messages.
- When logging a message to disk it should not contain a cryptographic signature
  of the sender, so if someone gains access to the log, it does not provide a
  proof that someone actually transmitted the messages.
- An observer cannot determine for sure when two parties are communicating and
  how much data they exchange with each other. This requires a trade-off: while
  sending packets through other participants in the network would ensure this,
  this also increases message delay.
- Padding of packets is necessary to prevent attacks based on statistical
  analysis of packet lengths. This is absolutely necessary when sending messages
  through multiple hops, otherwise it would be enough to monitor packet lengths
  to determine where a packet is forwarded to.
- Delayed forwarding is also necessary to prevent correlation of received and
  transmitted packets when forwarding. Sending multiple packets at once at
  certain intervals would help to prevent this.
- Private contact list: only visible to whom it needs be -- typically other
  friends -- not available publicly or managed on servers where server operators
  have access to it.
- Every component of the system should be open source, so one can ensure it
  really works as advertised. A closed component would be a security risk, as it
  could leak information or otherwise weaken the security of the system, which
  is harder to detect when no source code is available. This can be enforced
  with a copyleft license, such as the Affero General Public License (AGPL).

Currently available alternatives to centralized social network services are in
most cases federated networks, which use a standardized protocol between servers
enabling many service providers to take part in the network and communicate with
each other. Examples for such systems include web-based platforms like Diaspora
or Friendica, and others using a messaging protocol extended with social network
functionalities -- friendship establishment, status messages to friends -- like
OneSocialWeb, which is based on XMPP (Extensible Messaging and Presence
Protocol) or PSYC (Protocol for SYnchronous Conferencing).

These federated systems intend to offer more privacy than centralized systems,
but they still not fulfill most of the requirements above, in most cases they
only provide link-level encryption. They still store personal data on servers
unencrypted, just like centralized systems. Users can have a server themselves,
but that requires server administration skills which average users do not have,
so we'll end up with a few larger servers and several smaller ones, just like in
the case of email. Privacy is an even more serious issue in this case as it's no
longer enough to trust one company, there are several server operators in this
architecture sharing personal data with each other -- users' messages and
profile data are transmitted to and stored unencrypted on servers of their
friends as well. Even if some users run their own server, they would still
communicate with people without their own server, exposing personal data to even
more server operators this way.

It is possible to enhance privacy of these federated protocols by adding
end-to-end encryption on top of them, this is what PGP (Pretty Good Privacy)
does for e-mail and OTR (Off-The-Record Messaging) does for instant messaging
protocols. While this prevents servers from reading the content of messages,
they still know everything else about a message, e.g. its sender, recipient, and
size. There's an additional overhead of base64 encoding, which is needed because
the underlying messaging protocols often do not support binary data
transfer. Furthermore PGP and OTR can only be used for one-to-one messaging,
one-to-many and many-to-many messaging are not supported by them.

** Scalability

Efficient message distribution is crucial in social networks, as one of their
most prevalent features is sending one-to-many status updates, but many-to-many
group messaging is frequently used as well. To deliver these messages most
efficiently, multicast message distribution would be necessary. IP multicast
does not scale to a large number of channels, as multicast routing tables would
fill up very fast -- at least one channel would be needed for a user's status
updates, and similarly, at least one for each group -- thus this has to be
implemented on the application layer to make it work.

XMPP has a simple distribution strategy, it sends one message per recipient
server, which is only efficient if there are many large sites. XMPP's
scalability is also limited by the way it handles presence updates, the majority
of inter-server traffic in the XMPP network consists of this type of messages.

XMPP's use of an XML stream as network protocol without any framing makes it
less efficient, as it complicates parsing and makes it impossible to transport
binary data without Base64 or similar encoding. Also, protocol extensions
described in XML add a large amount of unnecessary verbosity to the protocol.

PSYC is another federated messaging protocol with a compact but extensible
syntax, which enables fast parsing and small bandwidth usage. It is a text-based
protocol with length prefixes for binary data. Benchmarks we made show that it
outperforms XMPP and JSON when it comes to parsing speed \cite{psyc-bench}.

PSYC sends out one message per recipient server when distributing messages, but
it also has manual multicast tree configuration.

** Peer-to-peer networks

Peer-to-peer (P2P) networks come closer to fulfilling these privacy
requirements, as in many cases they're designed with security and privacy in
mind from the ground up.

Projects such as Tor and I2P aim to create an anonymous overlay network, while
Freenet and GNUnet focus on anonymous information storage and retrieval. GNUnet
also provides an extensive framework for writing P2P applications, including
packet-based communication over different transport mechanisms.

In a P2P network every user of the network runs the P2P software on their own
computers (a computer in the P2P network is referred to as a node). This allows
for creating a network architecture where servers are not needed to store and
manage user data, every user can do so on their own node, giving them more
control over their data. High-capacity servers we had in federated networks
would be still useful in a P2P network, they can forward (and store when needed)
encrypted data without being able to decrypt them, this way improving
throughput, connectivity and stability of the network.

Combining peer-to-peer network technology with social network semantics allows
for creating a scalable, privacy-protecting social network based on connections
of trusted peers. The next section describes the architecture of such a network.
